---
layout: post
title: 'CSS Basics'
description: 'stuff to memorize'
date: 2024-01-16 15:30:00 +0000
category: articles
tags: [web]
comments: true
---

<style>
    table {
        font-size: 19px;
        border-collapse: collapse;
        width: 100%;
    }
    th, td {
        border: 1px solid black;
        padding: 8px;
        text-align: left;
    }
    th {
        background-color: #f2f2f2;
    }
</style>

CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) desrcribes how elements should be rendered

<!-- more -->

# Jargons to know

<table border="1">
  <tr>
    <th>Jargon</th>
    <th>Details</th>
    <th>Example</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Selector</td>
    <td>Targets HTML elements to apply styles.</td>
    <td><code>div { ... }</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Property</td>
    <td>Style rules applied to elements.</td>
    <td>In <code>color: red;</code>, <code>color</code> is a property</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Value</td>
    <td>Specifies the setting of a property.</td>
    <td>In <code>color: red;</code>, <code>red</code> is a value</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Class Selector</td>
    <td>Selects elements with a specific class attribute</td>
    <td><code>.classname { ... }</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>ID Selector</td>
    <td>Selects an element based on its unique ID</td>
    <td><code>#idname { ... }</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Pseudo-class</td>
    <td>Defines a special state of an element</td>
    <td><code>a:hover { ... }</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Box Model</td>
    <td>Describes layout with margins, borders, padding, and content</td>
    <td><code>div { margin: 10px; border: 1px solid; padding: 5px; }</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Flexbox</td>
    <td>A layout model for arranging items in one dimension (row or column)</td>
    <td><code>.container { display: flex; }</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Grid</td>
    <td>A layout system for CSS that allows for two-dimensional layouts</td>
    <td><code>.grid-container { display: grid; }</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Media Query</td>
    <td>Applies CSS only if certain conditions are met (often used for responsive design)</td>
    <td><code>@media (max-width: 600px) { ... }</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Cascading</td>
    <td>The process of combining multiple style sheets and resolving conflicts between them</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Specificity</td>
    <td>Determines which CSS rule is applied by the browsers</td>
    <td>ID selectors have higher specificity than class selectors</td>
  </tr>
</table>

# Essential styling attributes to know

<table border="1">
  <tr>
    <th>Attribute</th>
    <th>Details</th>
    <th>Example</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>color</td>
    <td>Sets the text color of an element</td>
    <td><code>color: red;</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>background</td>
    <td>Sets the background of an element,be set to colors, gradients, or images</td>
<td><code>background: #fff;</code> or <code>background: url('image.jpg');</code></td>

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>border-radius</td>
    <td>Defines the radius of the element's corners</td>
    <td><code>border-radius: 10px;</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>border</td>
    <td>Sets the border around elements</td>
    <td><code>border: 1px solid black;</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>padding/margin</td>
    <td>
      <p><b>padding:</b> Space inside the border between the border and the actual content</p>
      <p><b>margin:</b> Space outside the border, between the border and other elements</p>
    </td>
    <td><code>padding: 20px;</code> or <code>margin: 15px;</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>box-shadow</td>
    <td>Adds shadow to elements</td>
    <td><code>box-shadow: 5px 5px 10px grey;</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>font-family</td>
    <td>Sets the font of the text in elements</td>
    <td><code>font-family: 'Arial', sans-serif;</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>text-align</td>
    <td>Specifies the horizontal alignment of text in an element</td>
    <td><code>text-align: center;</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>display</td>
    <td>Sets whether an element is treated as a block or inline element and the layout used for its children, such as flex</td>
    <td><code>display: flex;</code> or <code>display:
block;</code></td>

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>position</td>
    <td>Specifies the type of positioning method used for an element (static, relative, absolute, fixed, or sticky)</td>
    <td><code>position: relative;</code></td>
  </tr>
</table>

# An example

```html
<p
  style="color: yellow; 
  background: grey; 
  border-radius: 10px; 
  padding: 20px; 
  box-shadow: 2px 10px 10px black;"
>
  Test
</p>
```

Output

<p
  style="color: yellow; 
  background: grey; 
  border-radius: 10px; 
  padding: 20px; 
  box-shadow: 2px 10px 10px black;"
>
  Test
</p>

- `padding: 20px;`: this adds space inside the element, between the content ('Test') and the border of the element. It increases the inner size of the element but does not affect its outer size. Both elements have the same padding, so their inner size is the same.

- `border-radius: 10px;`: this property rounds the corners of the element's border. It does not affect the size of the element, just the shape of its corners

- `box-shadow: 2px 10px 10px black;`: this property adds a shadow effect around the element. While visually it might make the element appear larger, it doesn't change the actual size of the element in the layout.
<blockquote>
<ul>
<li>Horizontal Offset (2px): 1st value, represents the horizontal distance of the shadow from the element. A positive value, like 2px, indicates the shadow will be offset to the right of the element. If it was negative, the shadow would be to the left</li><br>

<li>Vertical Offset (10px):  2nd value, representing the vertical distance of the shadow from the element. Here, 10px means the shadow is offset 10 pixels below the element. A negative value would place the shadow above the element</li><br>

<li>Blur Radius (10px): 3rd value is the blur radius. This value determines how blurred or sharp the shadow is. A larger value, like 10px, creates a more diffused shadow, making it appear softer and larger. A smaller value would make the shadow sharper and more defined. A value of 0px would result in a shadow with sharp edges, closely following the shape of the element</li><br>

<li>Color (black): The last value specifies the color of the shadow. In this case, it's black, but you can use any color value (like hexadecimal, RGB, RGBA, etc.).</li>
</ul>
</blockquote>

In the following, we add one property...

```html
<p
  style="color: yellow;
  background: grey;
  border-radius: 10px;
  padding: 20px;
  margin: 20px;
  box-shadow: 2px 10px 10px black;"
>
  Test
</p>
```

Its output below, you'd notice it's smaller.

<p
  style="color: yellow; 
  background: grey; 
  border-radius: 10px; 
  padding: 20px; 
  margin: 20px;
  box-shadow: 2px 10px 10px black;"
>
  Test
</p>

Because we modified the code by adding one property, particularly `margin: 20px;` which adds space outside the element (effectively the "white space"),between the border of the element and other elements (or the edge of the containing element). It affects the element's outer size, making it effectively occupy more space in the layout.
